feat: user command "preview" (like inccommand) (#18194)
neovim/neovim: runtime/doc/map.txt

    -addr=other		  ?	other kind of range

Incremental preview ~
                                                  *:command-preview* {nvim-api}

> It's possible to allow commands to be incrementally previewed when
> 'inccommand' is enabled by using the preview command flag. The preview
> flag may only be used through the Lua API (see |nvim_create_user_command()|).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commands can show an 'inccommand' (as-you-type) preview by defining a preview
handler (only from Lua, see |nvim_create_user_command()|).
```

    -addr=other		  ?	other kind of range

Incremental preview ~
                                                  *:command-preview* {nvim-api}
It's possible to allow commands to be incrementally previewed when
'inccommand' is enabled by using the preview command flag. The preview
flag may only be used through the Lua API (see |nvim_create_user_command()|).

The preview callback must be a Lua function. When command preview is
triggered, the preview callback will be called with 3 arguments, an `opts` table
which is the same as the table passed to |nvim_create_user_command()| callbacks,
the preview namespace number that's used to set highlights for the preview,
and the preview buffer number that's used for the preview window when
`inccommand=split`. Note that if `inccommand=nosplit`, the preview buffer number

> will not be provided.

Reviewer 2: better to write what will be provided instead, `nil` ? Then the reader can directly infer they should write `if preview_buf ~= nil then --[[ do stuff ]] end`

Author: done

> The preview callback must be a Lua function. When command preview is
> triggered, the preview callback will be called with 3 arguments, an `opts` table
> which is the same as the table passed to |nvim_create_user_command()| callbacks,
> the preview namespace number that's used to set highlights for the preview,
> and the preview buffer number that's used for the preview window when
> `inccommand=split`. Note that if `inccommand=nosplit`, the preview buffer number
> will be `nil`.
> 
> In order for command preview to be shown, these steps need to be followed:

Reviewer: - This documentation is a bit verbose. I think it can be reduced.
- Describing code in english is not really helpful. Just show a function signature.
    - I intentionally avoid backticks because overuse of backticks can be distracting in vimdocs.

Here's a suggestion for this part:

```suggestion
The preview callback must be a Lua function with this signature: >

    function cmdpreview(opts, ns, buf)

where "opts" has the same form as that given to |nvim_create_user_command()|
callbacks, "ns" is the preview namespace id for highlights, and "buf" is the
buffer where your preview routine will directly modify to show the previewed
results (for "inccommand=split", or nil for  "inccommand=nosplit").

Your command preview routine must implement this protocol:
```

1. Modify the current buffer as required for the preview (see
   |nvim_buf_set_text()| and |nvim_buf_set_lines()|).
2. If preview buffer is provided, add necessary text to the preview buffer.
3. Add required highlights to the current buffer. If preview buffer is
   provided, add required highlights to the the preview buffer as well. All
   highlights must be added to the preview namespace which is provided as an
   argument to the preview callback (see |nvim_buf_add_highlight()| and
   |nvim_buf_set_extmark()| for help on how to add highlights to a namespace).

> 4. Return an integer which represents the preview type. The preview type
>    tells Nvim what kind of preview is being shown, which allows it to carry
>    out the appropriate tasks to show the preview. There preview type can
>    either be 0, 1 or 2. Here's what the return values mean:
>    0: No preview is shown.
>    1: Preview is shown but preview window isn't opened even if
>       `inccommand=split`.
>    2: Preview is shown and preview window is opened if `inccommand=split`.
> 
>    Note that if `inccommand=nosplit`, there's no difference between a return
>    value of 1 and a return value of 2 from the preview callback.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Return an integer (0, 1, 2) which controls how Nvim behaves as follows:
   0: No preview is shown.
   1: Preview is shown without preview window (even with "inccommand=split").
   2: Preview is shown and preview window is opened (if "inccommand=split").
      For "inccommand=nosplit" this is the same as 1.
```

> Once preview is over, Nvim will automatically revert any changes made to the
> current buffer and preview buffer during the preview. All highlights set in
> the preview namespace will also be cleared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After preview ends, Nvim discards all changes to the buffer and all highlights
in the preview namespace.
```

> the preview namespace will also be cleared.

Reviewer 2: this doesn't seem to happen (clearing the highlights)

Author: > this doesn't seem to happen (clearing the highlights)

`buf_clear()` clears everything in the preview namespace when the preview buffer is (re-)opened on next iteration of the preview, so it's basically as if the highlights were cleared

Reviewer 2: But we also intend highlighting in current buffer, yes?

Author: > But we also intend highlighting in current buffer, yes?

yes, it does clear highlights for the main buffer

Here's an example of a command to trim trailing whitespace from lines that
supports incremental command preview:
>

> 	-- Trims trailing whitespace from lines
> 	-- Shows preview if called as a preview callback
> 	-- (which means preview_ns isn't nil)
> 	local function TrimTrailingWhitespace(opts, preview_ns, preview_buf)

Reviewer: - Let's use our Lua conventions in the docs, this means snake_case not PascalCase.
- The dual-purpose of this function doesn't seem to save much code and maybe makes the example less clear?

```suggestion
	-- Trims trailing whitespace in the current buffer.
	-- Also performs 'inccommand' preview if invoked as a preview callback
	-- (preview_ns is non-nil) by editing preview_buf.
	local function trim_space(opts, preview_ns, preview_buf)
```

Author: It's actually much simpler to keep them as the same function cause if not we'd need a third function that contains the shared code between the preview function and the command function which I think would only confuse people more.

    -addr=other		  ?	other kind of range

Incremental preview ~
                                                  *:command-preview*
It's possible to allow commands to be incrementally previewed when
'inccommand' is enabled by using the -preview command attribute. Possible use
cases are:
	-preview		Always preview
	-preview={func}		Preview only if {func} returns |TRUE|

The {func} part must be a function with the following signature: >

	:function {func}(CmdLine)

The function is only given one argument, which is the entire command line. The
function must return a boolean value which determines whether the command
preview should be triggered or not. If -preview is used by itself without any
arguments, the command is always previewed whenever the command line is
modified.

Every time a command needs to be previewed, Nvim executes the command. The

> command itself must do the job of making apppropriate changes to the buffer

Reviewer: spellcheck the docs

Author: Done :]

    -addr=other		  ?	other kind of range

Incremental preview ~
                                                  *:command-preview* {nvim-api}
It's possible to allow commands to be incrementally previewed when
'inccommand' is enabled by using the preview command attribute. The preview
attribute may only be used through the API. (see |nvim_create_user_command()|)

The value of the preview attribute must be either a boolean value, the name of
a Vim script function or a Lua function callback. Here are some examples: >

	-- setting preview to a boolean value
	call nvim_create_user_command('foo', 'call Foo()',
		\ { 'preview': v:true })

> 	-- setting preview to a VimScript function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	-- setting preview to a Vimscript function
```

Reviewer 3: I think it should be `Vim script`

	function! PreviewFunc()
	    return v:true
	endfunction

	call nvim_create_user_command('bar', 'call Bar()',
		\ { 'preview': 'PreviewFunc' })

	-- setting preview to a Lua function callback
	lua << EOF
	local function PreviewFunc()
	    return true
	end

	vim.api.nvim_create_user_command('baz', 'call Baz()',
	                                 { preview = PreviewFunc })
	EOF
<

> If preview is a boolean value and its value is |TRUE|, preview is always

Reviewer: There's more examples but I'll just mention this one and hope that the pattern is applied generally: don't use lots of words to say something that can be said clearly with fewer words. "is a boolea and is TRUE" is totally redundant. Just say "is TRUE".
```suggestion
If preview is |TRUE|, preview is always
```

triggered every time the command line is modified. If it's not a boolean value
it calls the Vim script or Lua function and triggers command preview only if
the function returns |TRUE|. The function may only take one argument, which is
the contents of the command line.

Every time a command needs to be previewed, Nvim executes the command. The
command itself must do the job of making appropriate changes to the buffer
and setting the appropriate highlights for previewing. It's possible to check
if a command is being executed for previewing by checking if current mode is
"cp" (see |mode()|).

In order for command preview to work properly, the command must follow these

> steps when Nvim is in command live preview mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
steps, _in order_, to implement the Nvim command preview "protocol".
```

Author: Not sure what the underscore around "in order" is supposed to do. Vim script doesn't seem to have a way to make text bold or italic to my knowledge if that's what you were trying to do. I ignored the underscore for now.

>     1. Make any necessary changes to the buffer for the preview
>     2. Add any necessary highlighting to the buffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Make any necessary buffer changes and highlighting for the preview
```

>     3. Trigger a redraw of the window (see |:redraw|)

Reviewer: the docs have hyperlink-like functionality, which can often avoid redundant wording.

```suggestion
    3. Trigger a |:redraw| of the window
```

    4. Undo all changes made to the buffer in step 1 without keeping them

>        in the undo history (see |:undo|)

Reviewer: we probably want to call out `:undo!` explicitly here, no?

Author: Yes but we can't hyperlink to `:undo!` directly

    5. Clear all highlights set in step 2

Note that order is important in this case, and doing these steps out of order
may cause issues. A good rule of thumb is to remember that all changes made to
the buffer for the preview must happen before the redraw, and the changes must
be reverted after the redraw.

> Here is an example that uses the -preview attribute to preview a command that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example that uses the preview flag to preview a command that
```

       window and not the preview window.

Here is an example written in |Lua| that uses the preview flag to preview a
command that trims trailing whitespaces from lines while following the
aforementioned steps: >

	-- Namespace for command preview highlights
	local namespace =
		vim.api.nvim_create_namespace('TrimTrailingWhitespaceNS')
	local preview_win = 0

	-- Function that determines whether command preview is triggered
	local function PreviewFunc(cmd)
	    -- Preview when first argument equals 'enable'
	    local args = vim.fn.split(cmd, ' ')
	    return #args > 1 and args[2] == 'enable'
	end

	local function TrimTrailingWhitespace(opts)
	    local line1 = opts.line1
	    local line2 = opts.line2
	    local curwin = vim.api.nvim_get_current_win()
	    local curbuf = vim.api.nvim_get_current_buf()
	    local lines = vim.api.nvim_buf_get_lines(curbuf, line1 - 1,
						     line2, 0)
	    local new_lines = {}

	    -- Check the first two letters of the mode string rather than the
	    -- whole mode string since more specific modes may be added
	    -- at any time
	    local cmdpreview = vim.api.nvim_get_mode().mode:sub(1, 2) == "cp"

> 	    local incsplit = vim.opt.inccommand:get() == 'split'

Author: Oh yeah, not sure why I used `vim.opt` here. Brain fart. Will fix

	    -- If in command preview mode, temporarily unset 'cursorcolumn',
	    -- 'cursorline' and 'hlsearch' to not mess up highlights
	    local save_cursorcolumn = vim.o.cursorcolumn
	    local save_cursorline = vim.o.cursorline
	    local save_hlsearch = vim.o.hlsearch
	    vim.o.cursorcolumn = false
	    vim.o.cursorline = false
	    vim.o.hlsearch = false

	    -- If in command preview mode and inccommand=split,
	    -- open the preview window if it's not already opened
	    -- Otherwise close preview window
	    if cmdpreview and incsplit then
		if not (preview_win ~= 0

> 			and vim.fn.win_gettype(preview_win) ~= 'unknown')

Reviewer 4: I think this could be more concisely written as

```lua
if preview_win == 0 or vim.fn.win_gettype(preview_win) == 'unknown'
```

		then
		    preview_win = vim.cmd_preview.open_win()
		end
	    else
		preview_win = 0
		vim.cmd_preview.close_win()
	    end

	    local preview_buf = vim.api.nvim_win_get_buf(preview_win)
	    local preview_buf_line = 0

> 	    for i = 0, #lines - 1 do

Reviewer 4: Any reason you are not just using `for i, line in ipairs(lines)`?

Author: Ah nope. This function was translated from Vimscript to Lua since the original one was written in Vimscript, so I ended up translating that literally. My bad

> 		local match = vim.fn.matchstrpos(lines[i + 1], '\\s\\+$')

Reviewer 4: Unless I'm missing it, it looks like you are only using `matchstrpos` for the match indices. For this you can use Lua's `string.find`:

```suggestion
		local startidx, endidx = string.find(lines[i + 1], '%s+$')
```

		local startidx = match[2]
		local endidx = match[3]

		if startidx ~= -1 then
		    -- Highlight the match if in command preview mode
		    if cmdpreview then
			vim.api.nvim_buf_add_highlight(
			    curbuf,
			    namespace,
			    'Substitute',
			    line1 + i - 1,
			    startidx,
			    endidx
			)
			-- Add lines and highlight to the preview buffer
			-- if inccommand=split
			if incsplit then
			    local prefix = string.format('|%d| ', line1 + i)
			    vim.api.nvim_buf_set_lines(
				preview_buf,
				preview_buf_line,
				preview_buf_line,
				0,
				{ prefix .. lines[i + 1] }
			    )
			    vim.api.nvim_buf_add_highlight(
				preview_buf,
				namespace,
				'Substitute',
				preview_buf_line,
				#prefix + startidx,
				#prefix + endidx
			    )
			    preview_buf_line = preview_buf_line + 1
			end
		    end
		end

		if not cmdpreview then

> 		    new_lines[#new_lines+1] = vim.fn.substitute(
> 			lines[i + 1],
> 			'\\s\\+$',
> 			'',
> 			''

Reviewer 4: Use `string.gsub` instead of `vim.fn.substitute`

```suggestion
		    new_lines[#new_lines+1] = string.gsub(lines[i + 1], "%s+$", "")
```

    -addr=other		  ?	other kind of range

Incremental preview ~

>                                                   *:command-preview* {nvim-api}

Author: @justinmk asked me to put it there

>                                                   *:command-preview* {nvim-api}

Reviewer 5: I see. Ignore the suggestion then :)

> It's possible to allow commands to be incrementally previewed when

Reviewer 5: Active voice
```suggestion
It's possible to incrementally preview commands when
```

Author: I think the passive voice in this case is fine since simply using the `preview` flag isn't enough to incrementally preview the command, but it *allows* you to implement incremental preview for the command. It's not the step but rather a prerequisite, if that makes any sense

Reviewer 5: Sounds good.

if a command is being executed for previewing by checking if current mode name
starts with "cp" (see |mode()|).

In order for command preview to work properly, the command must follow these
steps, in order, to implement the Nvim command preview "protocol".
    1. Make necessary buffer changes and highlighting for the preview.
    2. If 'inccommand' equals "split" and Nvim is in command preview mode,
       open preview window using |vim.cmd_preview.open_win()| and put the
       necessary text and highlighting on it. Otherwise, close preview window
       if it's open using |vim.cmd_preview.close_win()|.
    3. Trigger a |:redraw| of the window.
    4. Undo all changes made to the buffer in step 1, without keeping them
       in the undo history (see |:undo|).
    5. Clear all highlights set in step 1.
    6. If preview window was opened in step 2, switch back to main window to
       ensure that if the command is executed, it gets executed on the main
       window and not the preview window.

Here is an example written in |Lua| that uses the preview flag to preview a
command that trims trailing whitespaces from lines while following the
aforementioned steps: >

> 

Reviewer 5: Oh wow, that is a huge example. I haven't taken the time to read all of it yet, but I can already say that I fear that the purpose of the example (showcasing the preview feature) might get lost in the code.

Author: No way around that sadly...

	    if cmdpreview and incsplit then
		vim.api.nvim_win_set_cursor(preview_win, {1, 0})
	    end

	    if cmdpreview then
		-- Redraw screen to show the highlights
		vim.cmd('redraw')
		-- Clear highlights
		vim.api.nvim_buf_clear_namespace(orig_buf, ns, 0, -1)

		-- If preview window was opened, switch back to the original
		-- window to make sure that the command gets executed on that
		-- window and not on the preview window
		if incsplit then
		    vim.api.nvim_set_current_win(orig_win)
		end

		-- Set previous values of 'cursorcolumn', 'cursorline'
		-- and 'hlsearch' if they were unset
		vim.o.cursorcolumn = save_cursorcolumn
		vim.o.cursorline = save_cursorline
		vim.o.hlsearch = save_hlsearch
	    end
	end

	-- Create the user command
	vim.api.nvim_create_user_command(
		'TrimTrailingWhitespace',
		TrimTrailingWhitespace,
		{ nargs = '?', range = '%', addr = 'lines',
		  preview = PreviewFunc })
<

Note that in this case, no actual changes to the main buffer are made for the
preview, only the preview window and highlights are set to show the trailing
whitespaces. It's possible to also make changes to the main buffer for the

> preview, as long as the Nvim command preview "protocol" is followed.

Reviewer 5: Same as before, the word "protocol" feels out of place. Maybe something like `command preview steps` instead?

    -addr=other		  ?	other kind of range

Incremental preview ~
                                                  *:command-preview*
It's possible to allow commands to be incrementally previewed when
'inccommand' is enabled by using the -preview command attribute. Possible use
cases are:
	-preview		Always preview
	-preview={func}		Preview only if {func} returns |TRUE|

The {func} part must be a function with the following signature: >

	:function {func}(CmdLine)

The function is only given one argument, which is the entire command line. The
function must return a boolean value which determines whether the command
preview should be triggered or not. If -preview is used by itself without any
arguments, the command is always previewed whenever the command line is
modified.

> Note that every time a command needs to be previewed, Neovim executes the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that every time a command needs to be previewed, Nvim executes the
```

Author: Will keep that in mind, fixed.

> command. It's possible to check if a command is being executed for

Reviewer 6: Nvim will run the command, will it handle reverting side effects if the user cancels the command? If it does what is the control flow, and what sort of side effects does Nvim revert (only current buffer, all buffers, etc)?

Author: Neovim will not handle reverting side effects if the user changes or cancels the command, the command has to do it by itself. Thanks for reminding me to mention it in the docs.

previewing by using the "cmdpreview" key of |nvim_get_mode()|.

Here is an example that uses the -preview attribute to preview a command that
trims leading whitespaces from lines: >

	function! PreviewFunc(cmd)
	    " Preview when first argument equals 'enable' (case-insensitive)
	    let args = split(a:cmd, ' ')
	    return len(args) > 1 && args[1] ==? 'enable'
	endfunction

> 	command! -nargs=1 -preview=PreviewFunc -range=% -addr=lines

Reviewer 6: Don't know if we want to extend the vimscript/ex-mode implementation this has been avoided in the past (https://github.com/neovim/neovim/pull/17426) favoring implementation on the API level.

Author: You mean the -preview attribute? I think we should make an exception in this case personally, but I'm free to make changes if required

> 	command! -nargs=1 -preview=PreviewFunc -range=% -addr=lines 

Reviewer 5: Remove whitespace.

Author: Done

    -addr=other		  ?	other kind of range

Incremental preview ~
                                                  *:command-preview*
It's possible to allow commands to be incrementally previewed when

> 'inccommand' is enabled by using the -preview command attribute. Possible use

Reviewer 5: Do you mean if `inccommand` is set to `split`? I don't think `inccommand` is a boolean option, it seems that the only possible values are `nosplit` (default) and `split`.

Not even sure why it's not a boolean called `incsplit` tbh.

Reviewer 3: `'inccommand'` can also be set to an empty string.

Author: This applies to both `inccommand=nosplit` and `inccommand=split`

Reviewer 5: That's even worse. Impressive.

Reviewer 5: I see. The docs for `inccommand` confused me.

cases are:
	-preview		Always preview
	-preview={func}		Preview only if {func} returns |TRUE|

The {func} part must be a function with the following signature: >

	:function {func}(CmdLine)

> The function is only given one argument, which is the entire command line. The

Reviewer 5: I think I'd prefer a stronger tone here. Perhaps something like "The preview function accepts only one argument, which is the entire command line. Using two or more arguments is an error."? I think setting strong "Don't Do This" boundaries is useful :).

Also, does this mean that `-preview` with an argument needs to be used together with `-nargs=1`?

Author: No, `-preview` just takes the name of a function that's separate from the command replacement, and the function it takes can only take one argument. Also, I chose the wording based on the docs for the `-completion` attribute to keep consistency
